Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricard Lobs. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Timothy Weaver. He's a
professor in the Department of Anthropology at the University
of California Davis. He studies human evolution with the
focus on the origins, evolution and disappearance of neander
falls and the related topic of the origins of
humans who were anatomically and behaviorally modern. And today
we're focusing on topics like the evolution of the
human cranium bipedalism and childbirth, neanderthals, homo sapiens and
some other related topics. So Dr Weaver, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you for having me on your show. I'm
happy to be here.
So starting with the evolution of the human cranium,
which is actually something that you've done work on.
So how did it evolve over time? I mean,
and what is, what is characteristic about it in
comparison to other great apes, for example?
Yes. So we can think about kind of a
really longer term, you know, trajectory, we can think
about, you know, how are we different or similar
to Great Apes? And we can think about the
evolution of the human cranium over. Well, we if
we think about chimpanzees are the most closely related
species uh living today, most closely related species to
humans living today. Uh We shared a common ancestor
with them maybe 6 to 8 million years ago.
So, um we can think about, you know, the,
the human cranial evolution over that period of, you
know, 68 million years. Um And what we can
also think about it at, at a kind of
a um a a shorter time scale. So for
example, the the evolution of our cranium relatives, the
neanderthals or the diversification of, of the human cranium
across, you know, uh people living in the world
today, right? So we can think about these different,
I guess the different time scales. Um And if
you want to think about the kind of the
broader time scale, I mean, the probably the two
biggest differences between our cranium and I say the
cranium of a chimpanzee is that we have um
a really big uh brain case um relative to
a chimpanzee. Um So we hold a big brain.
Um CHIMPANZEES have pretty big brains for their body
size, relative to, you know, other mammals, but humans
have even larger brains um relative to body size.
And then we also have a pretty small fish.
So a chimpanzee has a pretty projecting, you know,
snout um relative to a human. So those are
sort of the two, you know, biggest uh differences
that you can see there's lots of smaller scale
differences as well. But, um, but those are the
two biggest ones. Um And if we, we don't
really know what the last common ancestor looked like,
right? In terms of their. Um, SO, you know,
so when there was a last common ancestor between
us and chimpanzees and chimpanzees had their own sort
of evolutionary trajectory and we had our own evolutionary
trajectory for, you know, 6 to 8 million years.
Um So we didn't evolve from chimpanzees. You know,
there was a, there was an ancestor for both
of us, but from what we can tell from
the fossil record for human evolution, um probably the
last common ancestor had a small brain and a
big face. So something that looked more like what
we see in chimpanzees today. So a lot of
those, those changes um um that uh produce the
differences that we see today would have happened along
our, along our uh evolutionary lineage shows. So, for
the 68 million years along our lineage. Um So
that's kind of a broad scale um of the
cranium. But I'm, I'm also happy to talk about
sort of the smaller scale as well.
Sure. And we'll get into that, but it's also
good that you gave us a little bit of
the timeline there because I was actually going to
ask you when studying the evolution of the human
cranium because we're talking about humans here I mean,
we can go back to the origins of the
homogeneous, but we can also go a little bit
uh back uh at uh up till the possible
last common ancestor with chimpanzees and australoids and those
kinds of species. Right? I mean, we're not uh
I mean, we don't need just to focus or
to focus exclusively on the homogenous,
right? That's right. That's right. Yeah. So we know
from genetics probably from, so looking at the DNA
sequence, uh divergence, uh differences in DNA sequences between
us and chimpanzees. This is where the 6 to
8 million year date comes from, you know, roughly.
Um AND there's um there's some uncertainty there, right,
in terms of like how rapidly these changes accumulate,
that's why there's the, you know, this, this window
of time, the 6 to 8 million years that
I'm giving. Um But then we also have a
fossil record um not so much on the chimpanzee
side. Um But on our side, we, we have
a fossil record that documents kind of their earliest
um what we call uh hominins. So hominid is
a sort of a, it's like a higher order
uh taxonomic category. Um And that includes um everything
that's sort of on our side of the split
with chimpanzees. So all this in the past that
are more closely related to us, to us. Homo
sapiens are more closely related to us than they
are to chimpanzees. Um And so what you were
talking about some of them like the Austra Pith
Australopithecus uh that genus. And um and yeah, and
then the earliest members of our own genus Homo.
So not Homo sapiens but other members of, of
the genus Homo. Yeah. So we can talk about
um all of that, that evolution of, of the
human cranium.
Mhm So maybe we can go step by step
here. But what would you say are the main
changes that we saw in the brain or not
the brain? Sorry, in the cranium. Uh FROM, let's
say, the very early ancestors, immediately after the last
common ancestor with chimpanzees up till uh let's go
up till the homogenous now and then we'll talk
about the rest.
Yeah. So the earliest uh kind of fossils. Um
So we have, we have a bunch of fossils
that are date to somewhere between maybe seven and
um maybe 5 million years ago. So this time
frame um that um that we think might be
hominids. But uh there's some debate as to whether
or not these fossils actually represent hominids. Um And
then, um but after, you know, about 4 million
years ago, so down, so now we're talking about
maybe fossils like uh Oslo Phe Azis, that's, that's
a little more than 3 million years ago. Um
We're pretty sure that those are hominins and so
we can think about, you know, how they uh
how their, their cranium looks. Um So a lot
of the difference is um if you just put
um an oops afar cranium up and you compare
it with a chimpanzee and you also compare it
with a human, it really looks a lot like
a chimpanzee. It looks a lot more like a
chimpanzee that looks like a human. Um But some
of the differences um is the base of the
cranium. Um So the part of the head, um
that, that sort of sits on top of the
spinal column um seems to be oriented differently because
uh these uh these individuals were um bipedal. So
they were walking on, on, on two legs as
opposed to on all fours. Um And so the
head is sitting about top of the spinal column.
Um And so the base of the, of the
cranium uh is different than in the chimpanzees. So
that's one, you know, kind of big difference um
that we see brain size is pretty similar to
what we see for a chimpanzee. So not much
change, maybe a little bit of an increase, but,
but not much. Um There's also probably some changes
in the teeth. Um And so those changes uh
affect the jaws. Um And so, you know, maybe
the face is a little bit different configuration that
we see in the chimpanzee, but still a pretty
projecting face. Um So those are the biggest things
we see um in the cranium kind of early
on. Um NOT so much. Um YOU know, not
so many changes, you know, not so many differences,
I should say, um, from what we see for,
for a chimpanzee, from a chimpanzee.
So then when we arrive at the very beginnings
of the homogenous with homo erectus, I, I think
that's the, the earliest species, right? Uh What are
erectus?
Homo, erectus?
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there's other, there's other species
that we may be uh classify into homo, but
there's, I guess there's some debate about whether or
not they should be classified into our own genus
Homo. So probably the, the um earliest um sort
of clear member of the genus Homo would be
Homo erectus. Yeah.
So some of those more ambiguous species that we
are not sure if we should classify as being
part of the homogenous would include species like for
example, Homo ho is that it?
That's right. That's right. Yeah. And I think most
researchers consider hail as Homo, right? They put it
in Homo. But um but yeah, but there's, there's
um there's maybe some clearer changes with Homo erectus.
Um um IT'S, there's, I think there's a little
bit of uncertainty in that, that time period around,
you know, homo habilis, um early homo erectus. So,
yeah, but I'm also happy to talk about that
too.
Oh, ok. So when Homo erectus gets into the
picture of our evolution, what are the biggest changes
that occur?
Yeah. So there's definitely um changes in brain size.
So, um you have an increase in the in
the brain case size of the brain case with
homo erectus. Um You're uh still below what we
see for homo sapiens, but um but substantially larger
than, you know what we see for chimpanzees. So
um you know, like, yeah, let's say 22 or
three times bigger than what we see for a
chimpanzee. So some somewhere in that range um and
you definitely have changes in the teeth. So the
like the hum the homo erectus has pretty human
like teeth. So what I'm talking about, things like
um small canines. Um So humans have, have pretty
small canines. Our canines are, are um you know,
very similar to our incisors, stuff, the teeth at
the very front of the, the mouth. Um We
don't have these big projecting canines like you see
um in a dog or a cat or, or
chimpanzees, right? So we don't have those kind of
canines. And so there's definitely changes um in the
teeth and changes in the face that are associated
with, with that. Uh And, and definitely clear evidence
for bipedalism. Um CLEAR evidence for probably walking and
running and moving around the landscape uh kind of
in a way that's, that's, that would be very
similar to us. Um And um and of course,
that has some consequences for the for the head
as well for the cranium. So, but yeah, I
would say the biggest changes have to do with
the teeth and the associated changes in the jaws.
And then um the changes the the big increase
in in brain cells.
By the way, since you, since you mentioned also,
if there um back in the time of homo
erectus, I mean, how did their dentition compare to
our Homo sapiens? I mean, in terms of, for
example, the types of teeth, the number of each
type of teeth, like the premolars, the molars, the
canines and the incisors, I mean, uh how close
were they to what we have now?
So they would have had they have the same
number of, of, of teeth, right, in terms of
overall, but then also the different categories. So the
same number of incisors, the same number of canines,
premolars, molars, um and actually chimpanzees have that as
well. So, so uh the last common ancestor would
have had that same uh dental pattern, right? The
same dental formula uh to us. Um BUT um
and actually homo erectus teeth actually look very similar
to ours, right? So they have um small canine,
small incisors, um you know, pretty small molars and
premolars, you know, like what humans have. Uh So
yeah, pretty similar to us. Um THERE'S details of
the teeth that, you know, specialists focus on but,
but in a broad scale, they're, they're pretty similar
to ours.
A and then from Homo erectus to homo sapiens,
I mean, what is the clearest picture that we
have now? I mean, is it Homo erectus? Homo
heal heal begans and then Homo sapiens or are
there other species in between?
Yeah, that's a good question. I think there's, there's
a, there's some uncertainty with this. So, um you
know, if we had had this uh this discussion,
um let's say 10 years ago or something. Um
I would have said that um that Homo erectus
gave rise to homo horns and then Homo Hagens
was the last common ancestor of Homo sapiens and
neanderthals, Homo, Neanderthal lenses. Um Now, there's, I think
some uncertainty about Homo Heidelberg and this um even
is Homo hadar Beis even one thing. So the
fossils that we used to put in camo had
organs, are they all part of the same species?
Um And so I would say, um there's more
certainty that Homo erectus was broadly the last common
ancestor of, you know, us and the inner tallest
and then also Homo erectus originates in Africa, but
the Homo erectus of course, also spreads into Asia.
Um And there's um there's Homo erectus in Asia
until uh quite late in time um as well.
But what's exactly happening in the middle there, you
know, between a homo erectus and between um Homo
sapiens. And um also in Asia, there's definitely a
group of fossils that you know, might be like,
have evolved from Homo erectus directly, but they also
might be related in a different way um to
maybe some of the other um other species like
the Neanderthals and Homo sapiens. So I think there's
actually a lot of uncertainty there. Um Yeah. So
anyway, I think, I think we, we, uh I
think we're a little bit confused as to what's
going on there at, at the moment. Um So,
um yeah, so, I mean, Homo Erectus was the
last common ancestor. So Homo erectus evolves in Africa.
Um And Homo erectus is in Africa and Homo
erectus expands out of Africa. And so, um but
there, there probably was some sort of intermediate species
um between Homo erectus and, you know, neanderthals and
us, right? There was a species in there. Um
And um and then there might have also been
some other uh species um Eastern Asia that, that
um sort of derive, um maybe it's more closely
related to this, to this last common ancestors with
Neander Thal and, and, and humans. Um But yeah,
exactly what those species are and who uh um
what they're called. I think there's uncertainty. I mean,
I think we have fossils that probably represent that
species. But um but yeah, there's a lot of
uncertainty, I think now in terms of the classification
of the fossils,
we're also going to get a little bit more
into the relationship between neanderthals and Homo sapiens later
on. But uh I mean, now that we've covered,
uh I mean, basically the main or what we
think is the main timeline of human evolution here
uh what are the main brain? Uh uh NOT
brain, sorry, uranium changes that occur between homo erectus
and homo Neanderthal lenses and uh sapiens.
Yeah. So, I mean, one big one is there's
a big increase in brain cells um that happens.
Um Both neanderthals and us have, have quite big
brains uh relative to um homo erectus and um
particularly their early homo erectus, right? So the earliest
fossils of homo erectus that are found in Africa.
And we can also do things where we try
to estimate the body weight of the body mass
of, of uh these different species and we can
look at brain size relative to body size. Um
And um it makes sense to think about that
because if you have a really small animal or
a really big animal, right? Uh The small animal
is gonna have a small brain because everything is
small, a big animal is gonna have a big
brain because everything is big. Um So thinking about
brain size, relative to body size can maybe be
a more useful way of thinking about um brain
size. And um yeah, so there's a big increase
in absolute brain size, but also seems like a
big increase in relative brain size. So brain size
relative to body size. Um AND that's happening in
our lineage and it's also happening in the NATO
lineage and actually the late homo erectus in, in,
in uh in Asia um also has a bigger
brain size than early homo erectus. So there's these
changes in brain size, sort of three parallel changes
in brain size. So they're at least to a
certain extent, independent of each other, which is kind
of interesting actually, um that you know that you
have the similar changes in these different lineages. Um
Homo sapiens um also has um a smaller face
than what we see in um Homo erectus. Neanderthals
um have a smaller face um on the sides
but not so much along the middle. So the
mid part of the face is neanderthals remains big,
but the sides, you know, kind of get smaller.
So there's probably a decrease in the face size
and neanderthals as well, but not all across the
face like what we see. So those are big
changes um that we see. Um I maybe I'll
stop there because we'll talk more about the differences
between neanderthals and, and us. Um I think as
we proceed
and, and, but looking across all these history of
the evolution of the human cranium, what would you
say are perhaps the main factors and selective pressures
that play the role there?
Yeah. So there are these increases in brain size
that we see. Um And you know, we, you
know, we have um I, I should say, you
know, we, you know, you have variation in brain
size and in humans, right? Living today. Um AND
there's no kind of evidence that that is related
to kind of anything uh like what we consider,
maybe intelligence, something like intelligence is also very hard
to measure, right. So it's, it's, it's not, it's
not a, it's not an easy thing to, to,
to um to look at. Um BUT over this
really broad scale where we have these big changes
in brain size, um you know, we think that
it's probably related to something having to do with
cognition. Um And, you know, the brain is um
is costly, it's a costly tissue. Uh uh IT
uses a lot of energy. Um And so, you
know, I think we generally think that the brain
must be doing something um kind of important functionally
because otherwise, uh why would the uh the body,
um why would you expend so much energy? Right?
Why does your body expend so much energy? So,
um you know, so we think that those increases
in brain size probably have to do with some
changes in, in cognition. Um But we're not sure
exactly what, what those are. Um It's interesting that
it's happening in parallel in different lineages. So it
seems like whatever, however natural selection is acting, it's
acting in sort of the same way across these
different geographic regions. But beyond that, I think it's
hard to say, uh hard to say exactly um
what's going on, the changes in um the, the
face um and the teeth um are probably related
to diet. Um And they're probably related to um
changes in technology that we see. Um AND so
um probably more um processing of foods with technology
as opposed to the processing of foods with, with
your, you know, with the body, right? Um So
you don't need um a big face, you don't
need big teeth, you don't need those things to
process the food as much if you're using tools,
for example, to process the food. Um So in
terms of the broad scale changes, those are um
probably um factors that are involved, but it's, you
know, it's difficult to say for sure, you know
what, what the factors um we have um I
guess correlations that we can see between uh you
know, changes in technology and changes in anatomy. But
um it's hard to really um establish causal relationships
there.
And when it comes to diet, I would imagine
that particularly from Homo erectus onwards, fire played a
big role there. Fire and cooking.
Right. Yes. Yes. Uh Yes. So fire. So there's
definitely evidence of fire that goes back to the
time of um kind of early Homo erectus. Um
IN Africa. Um THEY um one of the things
I think that's tricky with fire though is you
can also have natural fires. And so sometimes it's
hard to um distinguish between that and, and fires
that are produced by, by humans or hominids. Um
There's definitely very good evidence for fire like fireplaces
kind of thing. Uh Going back to maybe 400,000
years ago. So, um, and, um, but there's a,
there's also also earlier evidence of fire as well,
but I think it's a little bit spot here.
Um, BUT probably, yes, I mean, I, I think
to the broader point, I think cooking was probably
important and it was probably involved, um, in processing
the food and breaking down the food. Uh, SO
that, um, you know, you break down the food
and, um, your body can then absorb, you know,
more of the nutrients, um, in the food, um,
uh, by, by cooking it. And so, yes, I
think, I think cooking was, was, was certainly involved
but exactly the timing of when that came in,
I think is a little bit, um, more difficult
to say, um, because the, you know, the really
good evidence for cooking goes back to maybe 400,000
years ago and then there was kind of spotty
evidence earlier than that.
Mhm. Yeah. But, but that, that really messed up
with a very important role. I guess that both
when it comes to dentition but also the size
of the brain. Right? Because with fire breaking macro
molecules and, uh, it becoming easier for, uh, the
stomach and the intestines to really digest the food
and to extract more nutrients from it. Uh, IT
really was a game changer.
Right. Yeah, I think that's true. I think that's
true. And talking about how the brain is expensive
Right. It's an expensive organ. Um, SO having these
kind of high quality, um, energy sources, right. Um,
uh, IS really important if you're gonna have a
big brain. And, um, and so food, uh, so
cooking is probably important also, probably the introduction of
animal, you know, products. Um, YOU know, things like
meat, um, marrow, other things, those are probably important
as well. Um, SO, yeah, there's, I, I agree,
I agree with you. Yeah. Mhm.
And, and what about climate? Do we know if
climate played any role at all in the evolution
of the human gra?
So climate probably did play a role in. Um
Well, certainly, um it played a role in maybe
some of the differences in the cranium that we
see across the world today, right? So that probably
at that sort of smaller scale, it may have
played a role in the differences between us and
neanderthals, right? So there may be climate may be
involved there. Um I would say, I'm not sure
if climate probab, I wouldn't say climate played a
role um in, for example, the differences between Homo
sapiens and Homo erectus. Um I mean, there's climate
changes that are happening kind of all through this
uh global climate changes that are happening and those
are changing the environments that these different hominids are
living in and you know, that may be influenced
uh the selective pressures. It also may be influenced
the migrations of different hominids, you know, so there,
the climate was probably involved in those ways, but
I wouldn't say that, you know, the homosa cranium
looks different from Homo erectus cranium. And it's because
of some sort of climatic adaptation either in us
or in Homo erectus. I don't think climate is
a, is a big factor at, at that scale.
So, uh I would like to ask you about
other uh traits that you've also studied. But just
before we get into that, just by looking at
the human cranium, uh is it possible for us
to uh I mean, derive information about other aspects
of human evolution ju just from it?
Um I mean, I'm not sure exactly if I
understand the question.
Yeah. So for example, earlier, you talked about how
looking at the human cranium and noticing the differences
between our cranium and the cranium of chimpanzees, we
really notice are we are able to at least
infer some information about how exactly bipedalism would have
started, right? Because of the position of the Foramen
magnum, right? That is at the base at the
basis of our uranium and connects the brain to
the spinal cord and all of that. Uh So
uh I mean, that's an example. Are there other
examples of other aspects of human anatomy or other
aspects of our evolution which we can derive information
about by studying the human brain?
Yeah, I mean, I guess we've talked about some
things, right? We've talked about diet um we've talked
about maybe cognition um there or maybe in information
about things like, um you know, balance the organs,
you know, things that involved in balance and maybe
how is that involved with locomotion? Right? Um So
not just the position of the frame of magnum,
but some of the uh kind of more internal,
you know, kind of structures um that we could
see in the cranium. Um I mean, those are
probably the main things um maybe I'm forgetting something,
but those are probably the main things that I
think we can tell.
OK. And, and does something like childbirth connect in
any way to the evolution of our ukra.
Uh Yes. Yes. Uh And so, um so if
we think about childbirth in humans, right? And we
have, so if we go back to the last
common ancestor with chimpanzees, um and we think about
um the pelvis, right? So the baby has to
pass through the pelvis to be born. Um You
know, probably the last common ancestor had a pelvis
that looked more similar to a chimpanzee pelvis than
to a human pelvis. And so, um when you
have the origins of bipedalism, you actually have some
changes that happen in the pelvis um relative to,
to uh to what we see with, with chimpanzees,
but also probably the last common ancestor and those
rearrangements then interact with these increases in brain size
that we actually see much later in human evolution.
And what happens is uh because the brain gets
bigger, it's not just the adult brain that gets
bigger, it's also the newborn individual's brain that gets
bigger. Um And so you have this problem of
fitting a large brain, a large head um through
a pretty small, you know, birth canal. And that
has to do, I think with the interaction with
between changes that happened early on in human evolution
that are associated with bipedalism. Um And then these
changes that happened later in human evolution that are
these increases in brain size. Yeah. So I think
the cranium does interact with um with the pelvis
um in terms of childbirth
and that also connects to some of the common
complications we see in childbirth.
Right. Yes. Yes. Um Yes, I mean, we have
a pretty constricted um birth canal relative to the
size of the baby's head. Um The dimensions of
the mom's birth canal are roughly the same size
as the dimensions of the head, the baby's head
that have to pass through there. Um I mean,
that's the case in some other primates as well,
but in um great apes. So chimpanzees, gorillas orangutans,
um they have a much less constricted um birth
canal. So the baby's head is much smaller than
what you the size of the birth canal they
have to pass through. So that's definitely something um
that um that's a result of that. Um There's
probably other things that are involved. Um Right. Having
to do with, um, with, you know, more sort
of current medical practices that, you know, that are
also involved as well. So, I wouldn't say it
explains all of the things, all the complications that
we have in childbirth today. But, uh, but it's,
um, it's probably part of the story at least.
Mhm.
Yeah.
So let's get into n do to then. So
do we know exactly when they first appeared?
Yeah. Uh Yes, I mean, yes and no. Uh
Right. So, um we um from genetic evidence, um
we think that we shared the last common ancestor
with them about maybe 600,000 years ago. Although there's
some, there's some uncertainty is that in that as
well, kind of like what we talked about with
the chimpanzees
and, and that, that common ancestor, would it have
anything to do with Heidelberg or not?
Uh I think before we used to say that
the common ancestor was homo had borgens. Now, I
think we're less certain about that. Um So some
of the fossils that were considered Homo Haber sis
um in the past maybe represent the last common
ancestor or they're closely related to that last common
ancestor. But yeah, so the, the Neanderthal lineage then
starts around 600,000 years ago. But then it, it
does become a little bit of a, a matter
of definition. Um When you say that the neanderthals
themselves start. Um So, you know, we have um
fossils that are considered, um, the classic neanderthals. So
these are those fossils that were, um, kind of
originally described as neanderthals. And, um, you know, most
of those fossils are younger than 100,000 years old.
So they're pretty recent, right? In, in terms of
the, the time scale that we're talking about for
human evolution, the um the oldest fossils that sort
of kind of clearly look more like these classic
neanderthals, maybe go back to just a little after
200,000 years ago. So those are the kind of
the oldest. So you could then say that neanderthals
start around 200,000 years ago. But we also have
fossils that are older than this, that date to
more than 400,000 years ago that have a lot
of the characteristics of neanderthals, so that a lot
of these features. Um And there's also some genetic
evidence that links them with the classic neanderthals as
well. So maybe you could also then put the
start of neanderthals back to more than 400,000 years
ago. Um But yeah, because it's an evolving lineage,
then it, it does maybe become a little bit
arbitrary where you draw the line. Um So the
start of the lineage is maybe 600,000 years ago,
but when you actually say neanderthals start um becomes
a little bit arbitrary. Um And there's, I wouldn't
say there's strong like disagreement in that. Um It's
contentious but uh I think there's some, you know,
there's discussion about exactly where you put that start.
Um, AND that's just because you're, you're basically taking
a continuous process. Um, AND you're, you know, just
sort of dividing it, um, somewhat arbitrarily, but I
would say the classic Neanderthal. So the N tolls
that we sort of associate with the AOLS that
were first described, let's say they start a little
after 200,000 years ago, but there's definitely Neanderthal ancestors
that have a lot of the characteristics in the
ans that go back um from the fossil record
more than 400,000 years ago.
And where do they appear? And what do we
know about their migrations?
Yeah. So the um these Neanderthal ancestors, the oldest
fossils um that we're talking about here um actually
come from Spain. So they come from the, the
Sima de Los Hueso um and Atapuerca Spain. Um
And uh so those fossils date to um 430,000
years old. Um And they have um yeah, so
they have a number of these nal features. So
uh these characteristics and I mean, we can talk
about them, but there's, there's anatomical characteristics that we
associate with neanderthals. And these fossils from, from Spain
have those features. There's also some DNA evidence that,
that links them with the neanderthals as well. So
that would be um those would be the oldest
representatives, um the oldest classic neanderthals um also come
from Europe. So um you know, so different places
in Europe. So, um for example, there's some fossils
from Italy, um that are some of the oldest
ones, some fossils from France. So, yeah, so we
think that the origin of the Neanderthals was in
Europe. Um As far as we can tell, um,
that's where this Neanderthal lineage appears. Um And I
guess your second question was about, about migrations. Yes.
Ok. Um Yeah. So it's a little hard to
tell, um exactly the timing of different migrations. But
uh one thing we can say is we can
look at the geographic range of the neanderthals. And
so, um, you know, there's neanderthals that are uh
south um into the western parts of Asia. So,
um places like Israel, uh places like Iraq, right?
So down into there, um there's also neanderthals uh
pretty far east. So, like there's a fossils, for
example, in um Uzbekistan. Um But then there's also
some DNA evidence that goes further east right into
more like the central part of Asia. Um And
so they had, and then they, of course, they
were on the west, right? We really talked about
Spain. Um AND um also going, you know, north
um into places like Germany and, um right, so
they have a, they have a big, um they
have a big geographic range. Um AND, um, you
know, there's um some, you know, maybe evidence about
timing of, of things. So, um it maybe seems
to be evidence that maybe they migrated down kind
of south into the western parts of Asia. Um
And then, um so, you know, they, they were,
um so, you know, interesting, there were some Homo
sapiens fossils that are actually older than the Neanderthal
fossils from that part of the world. But then
what seems like happened is actually the neanderthals may
be migrated down into there and the Homo sapiens
may be migrated back into Africa or just, you
know, kind of disappeared from that region. And then
Homo sapiens comes out of Africa later and replaces
the neanderthals. And so, yeah, but in terms of
the timing of exactly when they moved to these
different, um, regions, it's a little harder to tell.
Um, BUT they did definitely had a very big
geographic range and they were, um, you know, as
we just talked about, um, they were around for
hundreds of thousands of years. So there's, um, yeah,
so, um, um, they were living in lots of
different um environments. Um If we look at the,
the species that they were eating, right, the prey
species, um, you know, they were preying on different,
uh, various different, um, ungulates, like large, large mammals
that they were eating. Um, AND they, they varied
across, you know, the, the, the, the ranges that,
you know, they were living in, right. So they,
you know, they were living, they were eating like
reindeer in some places and, um, you know, horse
in other places. Right. So, there were, there was
a lot of variety of, of habitats, I guess
that they were living in. So,
do we have any idea exactly when Homo sapiens
and neanderthals first get in contact with each other?
Yeah. So, I mean, there's from, so when we
look at the DNA of people living today, um,
people have ancestry out of, outside of Africa, so
out Africa and also some, um individuals from Africa
as well, um have a small percentage of their,
of their genome. Um That seems like it came
from the anal. And um it's interesting because um
this is also found in, for example, like native
North Americans or native South Americans like parts of
the world where we don't think um there were
ever neanderthals, right? So there was no kind of
contact that was happening um in that part of
the world. So it makes sense from this distribution
of, of the DNA, uh Neanderthal DNA and people
living today that when Homo sapiens migrates out of
Africa shortly after they migrate out of Africa, um
they come into contact with neanderthals and there's some
uh genetic exchange that happens there and then that
DNA that was exchanged, the Neanderthal DNA that comes
into the Homo Sapiens population then gets propagated to
be, you know, most people in the world today,
right? Um And so there was probably some sort
of contact in the Southwester parts of Asia. Um
BUT we also have evidence that um homo sapiens
came into contact with neanderthals in, for example, in
Europe. Um BECAUSE there's some sites um where uh
we've able to um extract ancient DNA and some
of those fossils actually have more Neanderthal DNA than
we see in people living today. Um And this
has been interpreted as it was because there was
some additional contact with neanderthals, you know, that happened
um after that contact, that was in the Southwester
parts of Asia. So, um but you know, there
also could have been earlier contact. So, um you
know, if we think about, you have this last
common ancestor that lived 600,000 years ago and you
have these evolving lineages. Um AND the contact that
I'm that I had just talked about, right, would
have started maybe 50 or 60,000 years ago. Um
But there might have been also some contact that
was earlier than that. Um And um for example,
like I said, we have Neanderthal fossils in places
like Israel. Um And we have early Homo sapiens
fossils in places like Israel and the Homo sapiens
fossils. Uh GO back to about 100,000 years ago,
maybe some of the Neanderthal fossils are actually that
old as well. So there might have been some
sort of contact that was happening, you know, back
then. Um So, but I would say the, the,
um the more um certain contact would have been
in the Southwester parts of Asia. And then there
would have been some additional contact that happened in
Europe. Um PROBABLY shortly after that. So maybe like
the initial contact was 50 60,000 years ago and
then the later contact was maybe 40,000 years ago.
So some, some in that, in that time period,
but people have made arguments that there was earlier
contact, right? Maybe even going back hundreds of thousands
of years. Um um So there wasn't complete, you
know, isolation of these, of these uh evolutionary lineages
from 600,000 years ago, up to say 50,000 years
ago, there might have been some contact that was
happening, you know, in the, in the intervening period.
Yeah. So because we know that there was interbreeding
between homo sapiens and hone Neanderthal lenses. Uh And
we see genetic admixture between the two, I will
call them species just for, just to make it
easier. But, yeah, that's fine. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um
I mean, in, in anthropology more generally, but perhaps
in maybe biological anthropology and paleoanthropology more specifically, how
do people tend to look at the relationship between
them? I mean, are we talking about the same
species here or not?
Yeah, I mean, so, uh you're bringing up a,
um an important point. So, I mean, there's, so
there's different definitions of what a species is. Um
And certainly by some definitions, uh neanderthals are a
different species, right? So there's, there's some definitions that
where you would say, yes, they clearly look like
a different species. Um And so in that sense,
it makes sense to call them a different species.
Um But um if you mean by species that,
you know, they couldn't produce, you know, fertile offspring,
right? Um That's clearly not the case with the
neanderthals and, and us, right? There was um as,
as we've just talked about, right. Clearly, they could
produce fertile offspring. Um There were um there may
have been some reproductive barriers but um but uh
clearly, uh there wasn't uh reproductive isolation between them.
So, in that sense, there, I think, um depending
on your question, um it's maybe useful to think
about them as different species. And then for maybe
for other questions, it's more useful actually to think
about them, more like um a population of, of
humans. So, um you know, just like we think
about, you know, different um humans around the planet
today, we can maybe think about neanderthals sort of
in the same way, although, you know, they shared
a common ancestor with us further back in the
past, right? So there's been more time for them
to diverge. But, but if you're thinking about, I
don't know, modeling it, you're thinking about those kinds
of things. Um Sometimes it's useful to think about
them more as a different population. Um But in
other cases, I think it's useful to think about
a different species. And um I think it's a
little bit sort of a pedantic kind of thing
to discuss exactly what a species is and what
the different definitions are. But I think the basic
point is that there's different definitions of species and
by some definitions, neanderthals are a different species and
by other definitions, they're not a different species.
Yeah. Yeah, because I, I mean, I'm not sure
if this nomenclature is still up to date or
if it's still the one you use in anthropology.
But at least, um, when people first classified the
Neanderthals and Homo sapiens, I mean, the full name
was Homo Sapiens, Neanderthal lenses and Homo Sapiens Sapiens,
right? I mean, so at least to some extent,
uh they were relating them more closely to one
another than perhaps what we would understand as being
two different species or not.
Yes. Yeah. So, I mean, what you're talking about
is classifying them as a different subspecies, right? So
the, the, the Sapiens Sapiens would be the subspecies.
Um, AND Sapiens Neander Hollens is, um, would be
subspecies and, um, you know, I think that classification
has sort of gone back and forth, you know,
um in the field, um as to whether or
not people use that classification. Um I think the
important thing, right? Because a lot of this has
to do with, you know, putting things in categories
and naming those categories and taxonomy. I mean, one
of the goals of taxonomy is right, is to
be able to communicate with other researchers and have
people understand, you know what you mean when you're
talking about things and, but there's definitely uh an
arbitrary uh aspect of this. And I think the
bottom line with the neanderthals is there, you know,
we shared a common ancestor with them 600,000 years
ago. That's actually not that long ago, right? Um,
um, WHEN we look across mammals, um we don't
expect reproductive isolation to develop in only 600,000 years.
It usually takes millions of years for, for reproductive
isolation. So they're very closely related to us. They're
um you know, we could interbreed with them. There's,
you know, in that sense, they're, they're kind of
part of us, right? Part of our population. But,
but then there's other aspects of the neanderthals that
um they're different enough that um that we could
maybe classify them as different species. So I'll give
you an example of that. So if you look
at say the the features of the cranium, um
and we compare, you know, uh neanderthals to us
and then we look at uh cranial differences across
different species of primates, right? So the differences that
we see in the cranium between us and neanderthals
are as large or larger than what we see
between many species of primates. And so by that
definition, by that or that, that criterion, um there
are different species from us because morphologically they're, they're
anatomically, they're, they're um, as different from us or
more different from us than, than many, you know,
clear species of primates. And so by that definition,
they, they, they seem like they are a different
species, but that doesn't mean that we couldn't have
fertile offspring with them. Right. So, I think these
different definitions. Um, YEAH, I think you need to,
you need to use the definition that's useful for
the research project that you're, that you're investigating. Um
And um and I think maybe people outside of
biology uh often don't understand that there's actually lots
of different ways, definitions of species and some groups
are considered different species by one definition, but they're
not considered different species by another definition. That's OK
because um you know, we're trying to uh take
this kind of continuous biological variation and put it
into these different categories, but that's not really the
way that the, the variation is actually patterned, right?
Um It's humans, you know, we like to put
things into categories, but that's, that's not really the
biology is more messy than that, I guess, maybe
that's, that's a good way of saying that.
No. And I mean, I guess we have to
always keep in mind that um me these definitions
that we use like species and in the case
of evolutionary biology, even things like genes, uh I
mean, are evolving definitions and they are at the
end of the day, just useful constructs that scientists
have to refer to a particular phenomena, particular things
out there. But, uh, I mean, they don't correspond
exactly to something like an essence or some essentialist
stuff out there. I mean, it's not that species
or gene or whatever is an essence that we
have to attribute to particular organisms, for example. And
even if the definitions are evolving and people disagree
uh in some ways in uh what the definition
should be, it's still possible to make scientific progress.
Yeah, I agree. I agree completely. That's, that's a,
that's a good way of uh of summarizing that.
Yeah. Yeah.
So you, you've also referred to uh uh I
mean, in passage to the differences in terms of
the cranium between neanderthals and Homo sapiens. Uh I
mean, uh uh uh to pick on that example,
to explore another topic related to evolution that I
haven't asked you about yet. Do we know if
those differences were the result of natural selection, genetic
drift or some other mechanism? And uh I mean,
by asking you that, I also wanted to understand,
how do we study that? I mean, how do
we distinguish if something if a particular trait is
the result of uh selection, genetic rift? Uh IF
it is a by product? I mean, how, how
do we do that?
Yeah, I mean, the short answer is it's, it's
difficult to figure that out. Um And um yeah,
so we can think about natural selection, right, acting
on the cranium and in these two evolving lineages
and um on, on different traits and there's of
course, different selective pressures, right? So there could be
things like climatic adaptation, there could be um there
could be uh selective pressures related to diet, there
maybe could be selective pressures related to cognition, to
speech, to uh all sorts of things, right? That
could be acting um on, you know, the Neanderthal
cranium on our cranium, right? So there's different ones.
Um, AND as you say, there's also these different
traits and the different traits are correlated with each
other. Um So, um, so for example, um, you
know, when your cranium grows, um, well, one, there's,
there's, um, you know, we don't know all the
details but um, we know that there uh would
be uh certain genes that have an effect on
multiple cranial traits. Um And so, um when one
trait changes, another trait will also tend to change
in a predictable way, there's also all the whole
developmental process that produces these correlations. And so, you
know, when there's selection, maybe acting on one trait,
it will also have consequences for other traits. And
so it's tricky to figure out, you know, well,
me what trait was selection actually acting on, you
know, just because I'm measuring this trait or studying
this trait, that doesn't necessarily mean that's the trait
that selecting was acting on. And then there's the
whole uh issue about um distinguishing between what we
call neutral evolutionary processes and natural selection. So, neutral
evolutionary processes are processes like um mutation and genetic
drift. Um And these are these uh chance changes
that happen in the frequencies of different variants of
genes. Um And if some of those uh variants
of genes underlie, you know, the cranial morphology, then
you know, you can have these chance changes that
happen in the neanderthals and chance changes that happen
in, in, in our lineage. And um because they're
happening independently from each other, you don't expect the
shame changes in both lineages. And so that can
lead to, to divergence. And um that certainly happens
a lot in the genome. Um This is actually
why we're able to figure out how far back
in time we shared a common ancestor with chimpanzees
or how far back in time we shared a
common ancestor of NALS. It's because of this process
of genetic drift, these kind of chance changes. Um
But we also think these neutral processes probably affected
the, the cranium as well. Um And so, yeah,
trying to distinguish between that. I've actually spent a
lot of time in my research, you know, trying
to distinguish between those um things. But yeah, it's,
it, as you said, it's a, it's a, it's
a kind of a, it's a tricky um um
problem. Um And um maybe I'll, I'll say so
we can use um some tools to try to
look at this. Um So there's a body of
theory that's called evolutionary quantitative genetics. Um And, you
know, quantitative genetics originally comes from animal breeding. So
trying to um you know, try to, I don't
know, increase the milk production of cows or, you
know, things like that. Um BUT um but it
has been, this theory has been extended by evolutionary
biologists to try to understand things about um evolution
um and evolutionary at a broader scale. And so
what this body of theory allows us to do
is make some predictions about what we would expect
if the evolution is entirely due to neutral evolutionary
processes. Um And then we can compare the observed
changes that we see with the expectations um under
neutrality. And then if we see deviations from that,
um this maybe indicates then that natural selection was
acting. Um um AND then we can try to
investigate um you know, which traits natural selection look
like is acting on. And so, um there's this
body of theory, this evolutionary quantitative genetics which allows
us to make some predictions about what we would
expect um if certain things were true, right? So
if genetic drift is acting, this is what we
would expect if natural selection is acting, this is
what we would expect. And then we can compare
with the observations right, be observed um And try
to use this to, to distinguish between those. Um
And so certainly that's, that's uh well, so that's
the way that I've approached it. And, and some
of my colleagues, um at some point, we may
be able to do some things where we actually
look at the genome um itself. Um But um
right now we have a really kind of poor
understanding of the genetic basis of most of these
traits. Um uh YOU know, we don't, um we
don't really know um like what genes are involved
in. Uh FOR example, the cranial features um that
we look at, um probably it would have, would
have been many, many different genes as well. And
so at this point, you know, we can't just
look at the Neanderthal genome and compare it with
ours and, and then kind of use this to,
to ask those questions. Um MAYBE at some point,
we'll be able to do that more, but we
need a better understanding. So, um so for now,
I think the best way is to use these
approaches from evolutionary quantitative genetics. Um But maybe I'll
stop there and I'll let you ask a follow
up question but
mhm No. Yeah. Uh Let me ask you on
the topic of neanderthals. Uh Do we know how
and why they went extinct? And, and I mean,
I, I'm asking you the question like this, but
of course, uh taking into account the discussion, we
just add about uh whether neanderthals and Homo sapiens
are two different species, maybe at least in a
particular point of view, it wouldn't even make sense
to talk about them going extinct.
Right. Yeah, I mean, on some level, maybe they're
not extinct because, um, some of their genome survives
in people today. Um, BUT neanderthals as a group,
right. As a, as a group that we can
think about, um, were gone, I think certainly by
40,000 years ago. So, um, and maybe even a
little older than that. Um, BUT that, I don't
think there's any Neanderthal fossils, um, any evidence of
neanderthals that are younger than 40,000 years ago. Um,
IF you had, we had this discussion a number
of years ago, um, I maybe would have said
that there were some younger Neals but, um, improvements
in our ability to date, um, the, the sites
and date the fossils, um, figuring out how old
they are in geologic time, right? You know, how
many thousands of years ago they are, um, have
changed that perspective and a lot of the evidence
potentially of younger surviving tas seems to have been
because the dates were incorrect. Um, AND so they
were certainly gone by 40,000 years ago and it
might even be like 45,000 years ago that they
were all gone by. So, but certainly by 40,000
years ago, there were no neanderthals as a group.
Um, ALTHOUGH Neanderthal genes were incorporated, you know, into
people, um, at that point. So that's, um, that's,
I guess the, when, uh, the, when part, the,
the why part is a is a much harder
question to answer. Um, AND, um, yeah, there's lots
of, um, explanations, um, you know, ranging from, you
know, competition, you know, with, with Homo Sapiens, um,
being out, competed with Homo Sapiens to, um, maybe
their population was crashing already because of climatic changes.
Um, AND then the Homo Sapiens kind of expanded
maybe into a, a population that was already, you
know, kind of crashing. Right. So there's, there's, I
guess there's a lot of different, um, possible explanations.
Um One thing we do know, so, um is
neanderthals seem to have been living at a pretty
small population size. Um And their population density was
also pretty small. Um We can look at their
genomes. Um And there's something that's called effective population
size that you can measure from their genomes. It's
not the same thing as census size. But, um,
and um, but if it is uh related to
census population size, um their affected population size was
a lot smaller than ours. Um So that's one
piece of evidence we look at, for example, their
archaeological sites. Um, LIKE, um I don't know the
quantity of materials that are in there. Um Things
like, um um you know, there were a lot
of large carnivores that were around in, for example,
in Europe, when the anatol were living there, when
Homo sapiens comes in, they all go extinct, right.
So they're, they're gone, they're gone quickly. Um And
so, right. So that
actually sorry to interrupt, that actually also happened in
the Americas and Oceania. Right. When got there.
Yeah. And a, yeah, Australia. Right. Right. All, yeah,
all those places. And so, um, so all of
this suggests that neanderthals were living at these kind
of small populations. Um And so, um, that probably
plays a role in their extinction because you probably
have a bigger population of Homo sapiens that's coming
into a region where the Neanderthals are. And even
if they're mixing the fact that there are less
neanderthals, you know, would mean that they're gonna contribute
less right to the to to later populations, right?
Even just if you just think about kind of
random mating, um if there are less of them.
Um And so, yeah, so demography probably played a
role. But um but, you know, demography is only
a part of an answer because then there's the
question of like, why are they living at such
low population sizes? Um Was it because they were
um maybe not as good as obtaining resources from
the environment as Homo sapiens? Right? So there's these
kind of more ultimate explanations that maybe we need
to look at for demography. But demography seems like
played a role and it seems like most researchers
would agree that demography played a role. So at
least um not that we should um decide things
in science based on consensus, right? But, but uh
but I think if you polled, you know, most
of the specialists in, in this, in this uh
this period that they would, they would say that
demography played, played a role
if it had anything at all to do with
them being out competed by Homo sapiens. Is there
any evidence at all that there were any relevant
cognitive differences that might have played a role there?
I mean, I think it's possible. Um, BUT there's,
um, I think it's a little hard to, to,
to say um there um I mean, so I
guess there's, I'm just maybe think about the different
lines of evidence that we have for this, you
know, potentially we could look at um DNA, right?
Ancient DNA and try to figure out if there's
any evidence for cognitive differences. But, you know, we
have a poor understanding of the genetic basis of
brain function and other things. So I think it's
hard to, to say for sure from that. Um
We can look at the fossils themselves and we
do know that there are some um changes in
um the growth of the brain case um by
looking at sequences of fossils, right? So young neanderthals
to, to adult neanderthals and comparing them with Homo
sapiens. And there seems to be this change that
um uh the colleagues that, that worked on this
call the um the globular phase, this change that
happens in the first year of life that you
see in Homo sapiens, but you don't see a
Neanderthal in the,
what does that mean? Exactly sort of for the
audience with the,
it's changes in. Um So um the part of
the, of the brain case that's um the occipital.
So that's kind of the back and into the
lower part of the brain case. Yeah, back here.
Um And then also like the parietal. So out
here, um and what happens is there's this change
that makes the cranium more globular, So more uh
in Homo Sapiens that doesn't happen in um in
Neals and the colleagues that have worked on that
argue that this is related to changes in the
brain, right? That there's something that's happening in the
brain in this first year of life that happens
in Homo Sapiens that's not happening in the Inal.
So that's another lot of evidence. And then there's
the archaeological record, right? So we can look at
um the artifacts that the N Ta were making,
we can look at the artifacts that Homo Sapiens
were making. We can look at. Um I don't
know maybe how good of hunters they seem like
they were, right? Uh HOW complex their technology is.
We can look at those kinds of things. Um
We can look at um the production of um
things that look like art, you know, symbolic, you
know, things, those kind of things and we can
look at those. Um And I would say there's
less evidence of, of, of, you know, symbolic um
behavior in the nanos than what we see in
um Homo Sapiens. So maybe that's related to cognition,
right. So that, you know, so, I mean, there,
but all of these are uh kind of indirect,
right? It, it's, it's hard to, I think it's
hard to say for sure. And um I think
as we have done more research on the Neals,
um some of the things that we thought neanderthals
were not doing, um we've now found examples that
they were doing them. Um, BUT even so they
may have been doing them less frequently than Homo
sapiens, right. So there could be, still have been
some differences. Um, BUT yeah, I would say it's
hard to say for sure. And it's, it's a
very contentious uh area of, of research because there's
people that have, um, there's sort of strong sort
of debates about that about, you know, uh whether
or not the Nals, um, had any cognitive differences
from us. Um, YEAH. And as you can imagine
it's, it's, it's a, it's a, it's a topic
that, um, that, um, that I think we have
to be careful talking about. But it's, uh, but
yeah, so it's hard, I think it's hard to
say for sure. I mean, certainly, um, they were
evolving kind of independently from us for hundreds of
thousands of years. And so I think it's reasonable
to suggest that there might have been some differences
there but whether or not those differences were um
such that they would explain why the Neanderthals went
extinct. Um I think that's hard to say
and, and I mean, even if it was due
to, for example, tech uh differences in technology differences
in culture, for example, or sociality, social structure or
something like that. I mean, maybe people would look
at uh things like uh symbolic expression, art and
so on and derived from that, that then neanderthals
were at least a little bit less intelligent than
Homo sapiens. But that might just be uh cultural
differences, right? I mean, it's not necessary I they
do not necessarily have to correspond to differences in
terms of cognition uh at an individual level.
That's right. That's right. Yeah. Yeah. And, and we,
you know, we talked about how they were living
at small population sizes and low population densities and,
right, so that could also interact, right? So you
have um at an individual level, you have similar
cognition. But from the um as a group, maybe
you have um because you're living at small population
sizes with small population densities, maybe neanderthals are not
able to develop some of the technologies that Homo
sapiens are living because a lot of that has
to do with interactions between individuals, right? The contact
between. So, yeah, I think you're completely right. Um
You know, there's, there's other things too, there might
have been some differences in life history with neanderthals.
So maybe they grew up faster than us maybe
they didn't live as long, right. So there could
have been things like that, of course, that interacts
uh that interacts as well because uh if you're
thinking about um about learning things, you're thinking about
transmitting information to other members of the group. If
you don't live as long, then maybe there's less
opportunity for that kind of transmission. So all of
those things, you know, interact. Um And so this
is, I think what makes it very complicated to
sort of say uh to say what's going on?
Yeah. So uh I have two more questions here.
The first one is uh what are we referring
to in anthropology when we use terms like anatomically
and behaviorally modern human? What is that? Exactly?
Yeah. So um so this, this term, these terms
originally um developed as a way to make a
distinction between um fossils. So you had fossils that
had a lot of the anatomical features that we
would associate with Homo sapiens, right? So that in
terms of their anatomical features, they look very similar
to us. But then when you looked at the
archaeological record, they, they are types of artifacts that
they were producing um what you could judge from
their behavior in terms of the archaeological record, maybe
they didn't look that different from the neanderthals. Um
And so the idea that um you might get
um like anatomical features, like, for example, like a
chin or a face that's tucked underneath the brain
case or a globular brain case or these kinds
of things, you would see that um in some
fossils. But when you looked at the archaeological record,
you'd sort of say, well, actually, if I found
this in a Neanderthal site, I wouldn't be surprised,
right? This kind of looks like what we see
in a Neanderthal site. And so the idea was
that maybe they're anatomically modern and what you mean
by anatomically modern is in terms of the, the
bony features, the osteology features, the skeletal features, um
they look like us, but um behaviorally, maybe they're
not modern because um from what we can see
in terms of their archaeological record, it doesn't really
look like the archaeological record that we associate with,
with kind of later Homo sapiens. And so I
think that's where those terms came is to, is
to make the distinction between that. Um And to
um I guess, leave open the possibility that um
that just because the fossils look kind of modern,
they look like us, um doesn't necessarily mean that
everything uh like in terms of the cognition, in
terms of the behavior, in terms of those other
things um is the same as us.
Yeah. And uh does that definition also include uh
neanderthals or not?
Yeah. So that's a good point. So neanderthals would
not be considered anatomically modern, I mean, sort of
by definition, right? They're not um you know, I
mean, in some sense, we define anatomical modern attorney
with reference to them, right? So, um but um
in principle, and the anatol could be behaviorally modern
in the sense that, right, they could be um
when you look at the archaeological record in Neals,
you could see things that we associate um with
uh behaviorally modern Homo sapiens. And that also leaves
open the possibility. Yes, that neanderthals could be anatomically,
they're not modern but behaviorally they're, they, they are
modern. Um And so that's where those terms came
from, I think, to maybe make it so that
um there was some flexibility in um in the
allowable scenarios, I guess, maybe the um and that's
where that, where that comes from. Now, I would
say, um you know, a lot of people have
maybe moved away a little bit from using the
word modern. Um I mean, we still use it
but um modern has so many different meanings. Um
And it's such a um um it's a word
that's, it's not a value kind of free word,
right? Modern kind of implies some sort of judgment.
Um Like if you say something like primitive versus
modern um right, you could sort of use those
in, in a kind of an evolutionary biology kind
of way maybe. Um BUT in common uh uh
speech, right? If you called someone primitive versus you
call someone modern, right? One, a bad thing and
once a good thing, right? So, so that, you
know, these terms are not, um, you know, they
have um these things associated with them. And so
I think a lot of people have kind of
moved away from, um, using this word modern. Um,
BUT uh that's where that distinction comes in. Yeah.
Uh I mean, there are some of these definitions
and even the names of species that unfortunately, when
we hear people commonly talking about them, I mean,
non-academic people, unfortunately, they tend to have negative connotations,
even the word Neanderthal itself many times as a
negative connotation. And, I mean, scientifically speaking, there's no
apparent reason for that.
That's right. That's right. Yeah. No. N Neanderthal is,
you know, it's, it's a, it's, it's like an,
it's an insult. Right. Right. If someone calls you
that and, um, it, you know, it comes from
this idea that, um, nals are really kind of,
you know, brutes, they're, uh, these, uh, these sort
of cavemen that, um, you know, can't really figure
out anything. Right. They're, uh, they're almost like, kind
of ape like. Right. They're right. And, and, you
know, and there, and there was definitely early kind
of reconstructions of neanderthals that were like that. Um,
WE now know that that's not the case at
all. Right. Neanderthals are very, very similar to us.
Um, THEY'RE not really apelike in any way. I
mean, they're not any more apelike than we are.
Right. So that, you know, we all, we will
share this kind of, um, ape, you know, kind
of heritage, ape ancestry but not any more apelike
than us. Um, THEY seem like they were very,
very competent, um, hunters. Um, YOU know, they were
doing a lot of amazing things. Um, AND, uh,
so that, so that view of them is, is
definitely not, um, in scientific, uh, based in, in,
in, in scientific evidence. But, but yeah, so there,
there are a lot of these terms like this
and, you know, you, you run into this a
lot as an anthropologist because um you know, as
anthropologist, we study humans and we study human evolution.
And so because we're talking about humans, um uh
you know, I think you have to be careful.
I think the way that you um that you
uh that you talk about these things because um
because we're not just studying any species, we're studying
ourselves. And, and so I think that you do
have to be careful, but there are, there are
a lot of misunderstandings. I think that arise from
that.
I mean, some of this probably also has a
little bit to do with our uh historical legacy
in terms of the way we think about, even
for example, people from traditional societies where up till
very recently, we use terms like primitive or non
civilized. And then this applies not only to uh
I mean people in traditional societies, but also race
and others or hominid species, right? So that, that's,
that has something to do with that, that historical
legacy.
Yes. And that's part of the history of anthropology.
Right. And it's, it's, it's the part of the
history that, you know, we're not proud of. Right?
Like, it's part of the, it's, uh, but, you
know, anthropology is sort of intertwined with this, right.
Um, YOU know, um, you know, scientific racism, right?
Ideas that, you know, uh, there's a scientific basis
for, for race and that, um you know, there's
scientific basis for, I don't know, racial differences in
cognition or all these other things, right? And anthropology
is sort of intertwined with that and, and um
yeah, so I, I think you're totally right. And
so I think more recently as anthropologists, uh we've
tried to maybe be a little bit more careful
about that and recognizing that. Um EVEN though maybe
when you're talking to other scientists, scientists understand what
you're talking about, but then um someone in the
popular uh press could maybe pick up your research
and maybe talk about it in a different way.
Um It can be used in ways that you
didn't intend. And so, but maybe part of the
responsibility of us as anthropologists is also make sure
we try to clarify things and try to um
um maybe pre-empt maybe possible confusion. Um That's also
part of our job as well as then and,
and we need to maybe be better about doing
that. And um and so, yeah, I think that,
that's, that's all very important. I was just at
a, um, at a symposium at the, um, at
the national meeting, um, in Los Angeles. That was,
uh, actually all about this, um, uh, this topic.
So,
the topic of scientific racism.
That's right. Yeah. Yeah, exactly. Um, AND there was
actually a little write up of it in, um,
in Science, Science, uh, science magazine, the scientific journal
about the, about the symposium. So,
wasn't that the one organized by people like Edward
Hagen? Uh uh And II, I mean, at least
I, I heard a little bit about that and
the, the name of Edward Hagen came up and
also Rebecca Seer was divulging it a lot on
Whitter.
So, that's right. So they were both participants in
the symposium? Oh OK. OK. And the symposium was
organized by uh Charles Roseman and um uh Jamie
Jones. Um They were the organizers. Um But yeah,
both of those people that you mentioned were speakers
in this symposium. So, yeah, so I I'm, I'm
bringing this up because I think um it's a,
it's a, it's a very pertinent topic. Um And
uh and so, yeah, I think, well, and some
of the people are listening, listening to this discussion
might also be interested in looking at that as
well.
No, of course. And I've had Doctor Hagan on
the show and Doctor Seer and Charles Roseman, I
will have an interview with him coming out later
this year. So, yeah, some of those names I've
had on the show. So, um uh and then
one final question, um we've, we've talked a lot
about uh the cranium and school morphology. You've also
done some work on uh perhaps some changes that
occurred uh across the agricultural transition. That is the
move from uh foraging hunter gathering into agriculture, into
uh societies based on agriculture. So, uh what do
we know about that? I mean, were there big
changes in school morphology? And if so why?
Yeah. So um there were, so I guess the
short answer is that there were not big changes.
Um The the changes are small, um at least
from the research that, that, that um I guess
I've done and um this was done actually by
a um when uh a former graduate student, David
Kes, I mean, he's, he's no longer a grad
student, but he was, it was his research, you
know, um in my lab that we were working
on, um the changes are small. Um BUT they're
detectable and um they have to do with um
for example, like changes in the size of the
attachment area for various muscles that are involved in
chewing or uh changes in the size of the
mandible, you know, the lower jaw. Um And um
we think that this has to do with um
shifting to softer diets, right? So when you shift
with the agricultural transition to softer diets, there's consequences
um for the cranium and um some of these
changes may be due to natural selection, but a
lot of these changes uh could also be due
to um the fact that, you know, bone response
to the mechanical forces that are on it. And
so if you grow up and you're chewing these
soft diets, then you're not going to have as
big attachments for the chewing muscles, the chewing muscles
are not going to be as big. Maybe your
mandible isn't going to grow as large. Um And
these kinds of things are gonna happen um Because
of that. And so, uh yeah, so there definitely
were changes, you see this at a global scale,
right? So you see this across um lots of
different agricultural transitions. Um But um I, I think
I do want to emphasize that um you know,
if we look at sort of the variation in
the cranium right across um you know, agriculturists and
I kind of, I guess free agriculturists. So, you
know, before the agri change and then also thinking
about it at kind of the global scale, right?
It's a variation across the planet. I mean, the
biggest sort of factor, right? In variation is actually
individual variation, right? So it's a variation that kind
of has nothing to do with um geography, has
nothing to do with subsistence, right? So it's just
like everyone's kind of an individual and everyone kind
of has a sort of a differently shaped cranium.
Um The next kind of biggest factor um um
has to do with um some like geographic relationships.
So, um like um people from parts of the
world that are kind of close to each other,
right? Tend to have more similar cranial morphology than
people far away. And then on top of that,
right, you have um some changes that have to
do with diet, it has changes that have to
do with the agricultural transition. So, right. So that's
why I said it's small, it's small, like relative
to other um you know, sources of variation, but
it's detectable and it's detectable at a global scale.
So it seems to be something that's consistently happening
with the agricultural transition.
Mhm Yeah. A actually uh as I was telling
you before we started recording the interview, I, I
studied dentistry and that aspect of the kinds of
foods that you consume that you chew is very
important for mandible development and for also muscle development
because it's even important for uh babies at a
certain point. Uh FOR mothers to mothers and fathers
to introduce um I mean, harder foods and foods
that are a little bit more consistent because otherwise
the mandible won't develop as it should and there
will be lots of uh dental issues associated with
that. But that's probably something that we saw during
the agricultural transitions across the globe because at least
at the very beginning, uh the diets were mostly
based on cereal, right?
Yeah. Yeah. Um, YES. And, and just generally like
softer kinds of diets, right? Um And, yeah, so
I guess I answer your question, yes. This seems
to happen with the agricultural transition. Uh WE don't
see in earlier, um for example, like, let's say,
like even just take the example of neanderthals, right?
You don't see evidence of like dental crowding, you
don't see, um you don't see evidence of, um,
I don't know, then the third molar is the
wisdom teeth, you know, not erupting, impacting, right? You
don't see those kinds of things um of the
teeth all look generally well aligned, I mean, not
just the and tas but also the early homo
sapiens. It's really after agriculture that you start to
see some of these problems, um these things that
we associate with um kind of the modern uh
I don't know dentistry, right? So things that, you
know, dentists that are are are treating, right? Tho
those are the things that you see um after
the agricultural transition. Yeah,
which is probably I, I mean, I'm not sure
if people have that specifically, but I would imagine
that even comparing um the mandibles and the dentition
of uh early almost sapiens to uh modern uh
I mean, by modern people, I mean, people who
live in uh modern industrialized societies, we would also
see some differences there, right?
Yes. Yes, I think that's right. That's right. Um
Yeah, so I think I mean, agriculture then definitely
had a, had a very important impact. Um I
mean, not just on our, I don't know, our
food production and our societies and our populations growth
and all these things, right? But also uh it
did have an effect on our physical um physical
aspects, right? Of us. Um INCLUDING like the mandible
um and our teeth and, and those kinds of
things. Yeah. So it, agriculture definitely was, you know,
I mostly work on um thinking about human evolution
much further back in the past because, you know,
agriculture only started maybe in the last 12,000 years.
But um but it definitely had uh a really
important, it was a very important um I guess
transition, I would say um in, in humans and
that there was a lot of um there was
a lot of impacts across a lot of different
um areas. So, yeah, so it's very interesting and
it's also important too that if we think about
um neanderthals and we compare neanderthals to Homo Sapiens,
we have to think of a little bit about
which Homo sapiens are we comparing them with? Are
we comparing them with um kind of present day,
you know, Homo sapiens who are all eating these
agricultural diets or we comparing them with, you know,
more ancient Homo sapiens who are eating these um
more hunter gatherer uh kind of diets that the
Neanderthals were and you won't, you'll get different results
depending on which comparison you make. Um And so
you have to think about that even when you're
studying something as uh as, as ancient as the
neanderthals.
And I mean, even earlier, when we talked about
the evolution of the car uh in si guess
that this would also be a source of evidence.
I mean, comparing humans or homo sapiens in agricultural
societies and even in modern industrialized societies to early
homo sapiens, it would be another source of evidence
for how diets actually influence the evolution of the
training and, or changes that can occur due to
diet.
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. Yeah. Great,
great. So would you like to tell people where
they can find you when you work on the
internet?
Um Sure, I mean, you can find me uh
on the uh anthropology department uh website for the
University of California Davis. Um ALSO have uh like
a paleoanthropology dot UC Davis uh dot edu website.
That's not just for me but also for other
um faculty and graduate students who are interested in
these topics. Um We have a kind of a
AAA website for kind of the whole group um
as well that you can find.
Great. So I'm leaving links to that in the
description box of the interview and thank you so
much again for taking the time to come on
the show. It's been a real pleasure to talk
with you.
Oh, thank you for having me. I was happy
to uh to speak with you. So,
hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Zuk Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz
J and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes
Mark Smith J Tom Hummel Sran David Wilson Yasa.
Dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli
Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stass, Nale Me, Gary
G Alman Sam of Zaypj Barboza, Julian Price Edward
Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca, Bela Gil Cortez
or Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and
Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa Anton Erickson,
Charles Murray, Alex Chao, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore
Fist, Larry Dey Junior, old Eon Starry Michael Bailey.
Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake
Zul Barnabas, Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson,
Chris to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda
Brendan Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine
Steinman, Perlis, Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dan
Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla. Good
enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina, Tom
Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas
Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carl, Negro, Nick
Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank
you for all.